 This is Halak Hoffman speaking from the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions in Santa Barbara. In the spring of 1968, the Center sponsored an international conference seeking to explore ways in which dialogue might replace the Cold War confrontation between Eastern and Western Europe. One participant was Herbert Marcuse, Professor of Philosophy at the University of California at San Diego and author of Eros and Civilization, One Dimensional Man, and Reason and Revolution. Between sessions of our conference, Professor Marcuse talked informally with Harvey Wheeler, political scientist and center fellow. Professor Marcuse, who enjoys a great following among the new left, is often referred to as one of the most influential thinkers in a relatively recent movement that is sometimes called Marxist Humanism. Mr. Wheeler began the conversation by asking what the term means. The first thing that I'd like to find out about is what in brief Marxist Humanism means. I'd like to know how in the first place it differs from other kinds of Marxism and then of course how it differs from other kinds of humanism. Well, you may know that I am not very happy about the term Marxist Humanism. To me it is somehow redundant and I very much disagree with the widespread tendencies to read only the early writings of Marx and to find the humanism only there completely disregarding the fact that what Marxist Humanism really is is in dust capital and in the later writings of Marx, namely to put it as simply as possible, the building of a world without the domination of man by man and without the exploitation of man by man. And in as much as this new world would require a completely different society with completely different institutions and completely different human relationships, Marxist Humanism is at the same time the theory and strategy of revolution. I see now and I guess coming into this element in Marx would be the discussion of alienation and the elimination of alienation which was part of what you mentioned about exploitation. Now I am familiar with three other kinds of humanism, there are probably thousands of them, but three prominent ones are what we sometimes call Renaissance Humanism and then there is a tradition that has come to be known as Christian Humanism and more recently of course we have been learning about existentialist humanism. Now I wonder if you would mind distinguishing in some way those other humanisms if they can be distinguished from what you have in mind. As to the first two, I would say that Marxist Humanism is different because by it is meant a life, a form of life, of existence in which men can determine their own way of living, determine their own needs, determine their own way of satisfying their needs and of developing their needs and in this sense to exist as free human beings on this earth which distinguishes it very definitely and ultimately from Christianity. From Christian Humanism, not necessarily from Renaissance Humanism. Well Renaissance Humanism was a very confined humanism, confined to an intellectual elite because a vast majority of the population certainly did have neither have the means nor the time to developing what is called their personality. They had to engage in the dirty work and only a very small elite actually was capable of achieving this humanist ideal. So you would in a sense say that what is shared by Marxist and Renaissance Humanism is in Marxist Humanism thoroughly democratized. Yes, thoroughly democratized. And now as we all know, Sartre wrote this book, existentialism is a humanism and is also then a Marxist and I guess it follows he's a Marxist humanist. But is there some distinction in your mind between Marxist Humanism as you know it and have written about it and existentialist variety? There's a considerable distinction in the first place I would like to say I don't think it is fair to refer today to Sartre's book existentialism as a humanism because he has explicitly and implicitly indicated that he no longer holds this position and has politically and theoretically gone far beyond it. Well in that case we have to refer to the life that this doctrine has of its own without regard to his. It has been said in connection with existentialism and I agree that the freedom of man which existentialism at that stage defined is a dreadful freedom. That is no more or no less than to be free to do what is necessary to do. For example, and that is in my view one of the most objectionable concepts in Sartre, he has maintained that man can be free even in a concentration camp because he always retains the liberty to reject his fate by protesting and being short. Now I think this is a caricature on the idea of human freedom and he himself, Sartre himself has gone far beyond it. Now as you know certainly you become celebrated in a somewhat unlikely place namely time and life, time magazine. I am very much worried about it. And this is enough to disturb anyone. Well you see if I may say that here it is at the same time a beautiful verification of my philosophy that in society everything can be co-opted and everything can be digested. You have become part of the establishment. That is right. If I can become part of the establishment it serves me right. Now time magazine is referred to you as the prophet of Europe's new left and of course we know today that Europe's new left is in revolt. Now first I'd like to ask you to explain a little bit what is new about Europe's new left and what it is and then secondly how it is different from the American new left. Well to the first point and which is common to the American new left they do no longer adhere to the old ideologies including Marxian ideologies where these ideologies are obviously denied by the facts. There is no longer this exclusive focusing for example on the working classes as the only agents of change and there is and that seems to me most important the conviction, the feeling, the deep profound feeling that if a socialist society is not essentially different from the established societies no matter how good they may be it isn't worth fighting for. Now is this a criticism against the eastern collectivist democracies? That contains a lot of criticism of the eastern socialist societies which the new left especially in Europe criticizes that this is still mainly replacing one form of control and one form of domination by another. And here we get into discussions of bureaucratic power and the new bureaucratic state in the other sense. At the same time however they do believe and I share this believe that the socialist societies of the east still have the potential and the possibility to develop into a genuine socialism. They don't have the original sin of property relationship and this gives them a possibility of ultimate freedom. Now you mentioned that they have abandoned a certain element of traditional Marxist class analysis. Because it was abandoned in reality. Because life passed it by. Now what is, and this is a curious question for Marxism in general it seems to me today, what is one to look forward to as the agency of revolutionary change if the working class is not any longer to be regarded as an agency of revolution? I have been bothered about this question for a long time and I'm afraid I cannot give you a satisfactory answer. Only thing I can say is that it seems to me wrong to go around looking for the agents of historical change. The agents of change probably will come up and will become identifiable only in the process of change itself. But one cannot simply become defeatist or withdraw by saying there are no visible and identifiable agents of change. Our work probably creates or helps to create agents of change. Let's follow that just a little bit further because if one actually abandons the dialectical mechanism producing a revolutionary class one has abandoned a great deal of Marxist theory in making that step. That's certainly true. Now what would you make of the maneuver that is sometimes announced namely that the agency of revolution is no longer to be looked for from inside the nation state but rather on a world level in which what we loosely call the third world becomes the external proletariat and is in effect the working class in Marxist terms of the entire West and the industrial combine as if it were a class and that the dynamics of the Marxist revolution will work itself out in that way with the third world taking the role in the world at large that the working class was said to take inside a nation. I go a long way with this conception and even more I think it is a genuine dialectical development of the Marxian conception. Corporate capitalism today is a global system and what may appear first as external proletariat is actually an internal proletariat in terms of the world in terms of the world in terms of the global interest and the global power of capitalism. So very definitely the third world forces historical air of the Marxian proletariat are in this sense within the dominion of corporate capitalism. Now this makes an interesting tie between let us say the movement of the African peoples and their struggle for independence and freedom and on the other hand the struggle of the technically minority group inside America namely the Negroes. In terms of the world struggle they cease to become a minority and the argument we always make against the Negro revolution is well how can a minority pull off a revolution. But in terms of the analysis that we have been following now they cease to become a minority and they become very potentially effective vanguard of a revolutionary movement. On the other hand I don't think we can overlook that at this stage the effective link between the black people in this country and in Africa are practically non-existent. Yes, spiritual. Perhaps spiritual. Convince Martin Luther King that this link spiritually should be made. Yes. But it is for the time being only a matter of the future. Now let's come back to the new left because I wanted to get some feeling for what marks of difference there are between the European new left and the American new left. One of these marks I would take it is that while the American new left is not necessarily Marxist in foundation, one branch of it is certainly but not all branches, the new European new left is apparently developing or an evolutionary Marxist orientation. Yes, a neo-Marxist. I would say a neo-Marxist development. And are there any other differences that you can think of? For example, the American new left is very, very emotionally involved in the struggle for participatory democracy and this feeling for community, the word community and building new communities that are essentially democratic and unalienated. Is there any of this strain in the European new left? There is one in a very different way because the European new left works and operates in a very different context. It operates in the context of societies where a large part of the labor movement is still at least potentially radical, Marxist and political, which is not the case in the United States. And therefore this... It has an ally of the subject. And so in Europe this participatory democracy can assume much more concrete and real forms. For example, the participation of labor in management, what they call co-gestion, auto-gestion, that is a new strategy of labor as advocated by Andrei Gortz, for example. Well, Gortz, Yugoslavia. And in Yugoslavia very strongly. But that in this country wouldn't make any sense. Yes, it would make no sense at all. None whatsoever because participation of labor and management wouldn't mean in no way any radical political change to the better, perhaps to the worse. Yeah. Now, the papers today of course, and we're speaking at a time that's just about the end of April, the papers today are full of the riots that have occurred and the demonstrations that have occurred in West Germany over the incident that involved one of your disciples. And a very brilliant young man, I understand. I wonder if you'd say a little bit about him, why he is so significant. He appears to have almost a prophetic role. He appears to almost attract worship. And then also something about the Springer press and why the feeling against it is so intense among the students. Well, I met this young man's name. Rudi Duczka. Rudi Duczka. Rudi Duczka. I met Rudi only, I think, about a year ago in Berlin. And I was immediately taken by him and taken to him. He is a highly intelligent, honest and active student. He's an American girl. He married an American girl, yes, a Chicago girl. He is, in my view, one of the great hopes of all those who work for a better society. And as I said to the German press agency when they called me the day after the attempted atentat, the great hope of all those who work for a better society and for the abolition of the horrors of the established society. A man who is equally intelligent in questions of theory and of practice. For example, the way he organized demonstrations, found new forms of organization, and so on is absolutely amazing. I think that is all I can say about him. I mean, the... We were going to say something about the Springer press and why the feeling is so high. You know that the Springer concern had a monopoly of, I think, about 70 percent of the decisive public opinion making newspapers and magazines in Germany. This is of the national press. Berlin and West Germany. Yes. I mean, there are many local presses, but his papers reach a national audience. A national audience. About 75 percent of that audience. That's right. And he is fully supporting the war in Vietnam. His papers have led for more than a year vicious campaign against the student opposition. They are in favor of all the reactionary policies in West Germany and Berlin. And their language was such that the attempted assassination of Rudi Deutschke to me didn't come as surprising at all. You wouldn't go so far as to say that there had been incitement. No, you have to be careful in saying that. Look at the language of the papers, what have they been doing all these years, and then look at the... The Springer press, however, is not strictly speaking neo-Nazi, is it? Or would you say that it has some overtones of being neo-Nazi? If you identify Nazism with anti-Semitism, no. It's not anti-Semitic. Because certainly not on the contrary. He was careful to give large amounts of money to Israel and to Brandeis University. Oh, yes. Neo-Nazi in this sense, no. But in the way in which I described it, the exponent of all the repressive and aggressive policies in Germany. So that he is in classical Marxist term an apologist for imperialism and colonialism and neocolonialism, I take it. I would say so. This helps explain the animus of the students. I take it then in addition to that, he represents a subtle new expression of the establishment of the power elite that makes him a... Of a highly concentrated power elite. Yes, of a new sophisticated type. So his influence is somewhat new for the continental European mind to cope with. We've been accustomed to your friends at Time Magazine exercising this kind of influence for a long time, so we take it perhaps a little bit too easily in our stride. In Germany I think it is something new. Something new in Germany, yes. And that part accounts for the violence of the reaction. Now, there's one other topic that I'm curious about and I know that you're very much aware of and interested in. And we know really very little about this, but we're told that there is an extremely exciting and very vital Christian-Marxist dialogue taking place in Europe. And indeed spreading to America as witnessed the conference we're having here, the conference that was held last year at the University of Notre Dame. And these conferences between Christians and Marxists are spreading like wildfire. In fact, I'm afraid they're getting a little modish and a little too fashionable. Well, that's what I'm afraid of. You know we talked about that this morning. I'm afraid of that in this dialogue one ends by glossing over the real differences. I'd like to ask you what you make of the Christian-Marxist dialogue. What is it and what is involved? Are both sides making fundamental compromises or not? Well, that's just the point. We don't know yet. I mean, don't misunderstand me. I would definitely say it is better to have these dialogues and not to have it. But on the other hand, I repeat, there is a danger of covering up or glossing over the real and substantial differences between Christianity and Marxists. Could you put your finger on what you think the most difficult of this? Yes. For example, I can hardly imagine any Christianity without the transcendent element, without the commitment to Christ, as the Messiah, and the faith, the belief in a world hereafter. And this is absolutely contrary to Marxism, which believes that the human condition can and should be improved by man's own power, and that any promise of a world hereafter can only serve to prolong or absolve the actual suffering of man. First with regard to the transcendence, there is, I guess, a possibility of suggesting that Herbert Marcuse in Reason and Revolution had in some sense a doctrine of transcendence. Yes, you are quite right. The difference being that the transcendence I was talking of there is an empirical, historical transcendence to a different form of society where a Christian transcendent is a transcendence out of this world to another one. Now, the second question along that line is, is there not this allegedly new breed of Christian theologian that develops or reduces or transforms Christianity into something like the transcendence and the doctrines that you yourself have developed? Yes, but then I'm at a loss to say in what sense they are still Christians. So if they join you, fine. That's right. But that means that they're simply joining you. Yes. That's a good point. But the fact does remain, does it not, that the most exciting developments in Christian theology are developments along this line. And it is among the people who are making these theological developments that the Christian Marxist dialogue is taking place most actively and most fruitfully. Yes, that is true. However, I would say that the really great change in Christianity is rather represented by those Christians, priests and others, who actually join, for example, the guerrillas in Latin America and fight with them. Yes. I mean, they seem to be the real Christians. I'm talking about the Basques and... That's right. They're putting their doctrines on the firing line rather than in the seminar. That's right. I think that's a good point. Now, the question that is puzzling me with regard to the Christian Marxist dialogue is, what difference does it make? Let's put it another way. How many Christians are there left in the world, or anyway, and where is Christianity going? Why would Marxist want to engage in it? That depends on your definition of Christian and Christianity. I mean, if you take, for example, Kierkegaard's definition, I think very few Christians will be left here on Earth, and the vast majority would not consider Christianity. See, what I'm trying to get at, and perhaps a little facetiously, is how significant is it, even if it exists? Is what? The Christian Marxist dialogue doesn't mean anything. Well, it is significant in the sense, brings us together with our counterparts in the East, for example, that there is a real exchange of ideas, and that out of this exchange of ideas, perhaps we are finding means and ways of trying to prevent or delay the outbreak of the war, intensification of hostile coexistence or whatever it is. But I don't think we should overrate the actual importance of these dialogues. Now, one of the most active leaders in the Christian Marxist dialogue is, of course, Roger Garoddie of France. And Garoddie is interesting for many reasons, but one of them is that he has seized upon Tyre de Chardin as a bridge between Christians and Marxists. And Tyre de Chardin was, of course, a priest who was kind of a biologist and a kind of a theorist of evolution and a kind of a theologian. And some people say he wasn't any good at any one of these, but he wrote brilliant books and very exciting books and very exciting ideas. So what I'd like to know is, do you feel that Garoddie has a sound intuition here, and what is your own feeling about the work of Tyre? Well, all I can say is I have read a little Tyre de Chardin, and I couldn't find out by any stretch of the imagination why he is so important in this Christian Marxist dialogue why he is so important for Marxists. It seemed to me along this line what you get is much more a transformation of Marxism into a same Christian doctrine than a radicalization of Christianity. I see. So you feel that Garoddie has a somewhat reactionary role in the influence. Well, reactionary is too hard a word, but if you press me, I might be willing to agree. Well, I must say, I thank you very much for a really interesting and informative discussion. You're welcome. You have been listening to an informal conversation recorded at the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions in Santa Barbara during a conference on East-West Dialogue. Harvey Wheeler, a fellow at the Center, talked with Herbert Marcuse of the University of California at San Diego. Parts of the conversation were later published in the July issue of The Center Magazine under the title Varieties of Humanism. If you would like to receive a copy of that issue, write Box 4068 Santa Barbara. That address again, Box 4068 Santa Barbara. This is Halak Hoffman speaking from the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions in Santa Barbara.